November 17th, 1989, Matt Spahn is interviewing
me for a journalism project. How did that go?
This is an interview with Judith A. Baer by Matt W.
Spahn. on November 17, 1989, at Bolton Hall, Texas
A&M University, concerning feminism. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge, I am asking
you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas A&M Oral
History Collection in the University Archives.
Is that all right with you? Right. Let's begin.
Tell me about yourself. Okay. I was born in Mount
Kisco, New York, while my father was at Wright
Field in Dayton, Ohio, during World War II, and my
mother was visiting her family. When the war
ended, we moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts,
where my father got a PhD at Harvard. I like to
describe myself as a second-generation
political scientist. We lived in Cambridge until
I was 14, then we moved to Arlington, which is near
Cambridge, where I went to high school. I then went
to Bryn Mawr College, got an AB there in 1968, got my
MA from the University of Chicago in Political
Science in 71, and my PhD in 1974. And after a long
series of cross-country moves, trials and
tribulations, I am an associate professor of
political science at Texas A&M. Thank you. Let's
start off your early childhood because we want to
see how this has led up to you. There is a profile of
the professional woman which has her as either the
oldest child of daughters only or the only child of
someone who is very close to and influenced by her
father and grows up in a non-traditional family.
That is not me. I am the oldest, and I have three
younger brothers, no sisters, and we grew up in a
family which was extremely traditional with
respect to sex roles. And I have always said to
people that I've been a feminist ever since I can
remember. When I was eight years old, I decided I
wanted to be the first woman president. You've got
to remember this is back in the 1950s. The 1950s
were not a great decade for feminism. He was high
school, and by that time it was the 1960s. I
remember high school as the worst four years of my
life so far anyway. And things only got better when
I went to college. I went to college planning to
become a lawyer, maybe possibly the first woman
Supreme Court Justice, which it's already too
late for. And in my junior year, I met a great
teacher, Peter Bachrach at Bryn Mawr College, and
it was partly his influence. that made me want to go
into graduate school in political science. And
then I went to the University of Chicago. And about
that time, and this is the late 1960s, the feminist
movement, the newer wave of the feminist movement
came along. And I just wish it had happened 20 years
earlier, but I really believe that if I'd been born
in the 1920s or 30s instead of the 1940s, I would
have gone absolutely crazy. So it was very
fortunate the feminist movement came along when
it did. You said the new wave in the late 60s. When
was the very first wave? The very first feminist
movement in this country is usually seen as having
begun in 1848 with the convention at Seneca Falls,
New York. Well, there had been, okay, the first
American woman to write about feminism was Judith
Sergeant Murray, and her book on the equality of
the sexes was published in 1790. It wasn't very
influential at the time. She was influenced by the
great British 18th century feminist Mary
Wollstonecraft. The women who convened at Seneca
Falls, and prominent among them were Susan B.
Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia
Mott. Most of them came out of the abolitionist
movement, the movement to abolish slavery. There
had been, in the earlier 1840s, a large
anti-slavery convention in London. And Stanton
and Mott, who were present, were not allowed to
speak because it was considered unseemly for
women to speak in public, and they decided it
wasn't only the slaves that needed liberating.
There's a real parallel with the later feminist
movement because most of us had been involved in
the civil rights movement and also in the student
and anti-war movement of the 60s. But there's a
Seneca Falls Declaration, and it's modeled after
the Declaration of Independence, where they talk
about histories of injuries and usurpations. And
they mention such things as the practice then of
giving custody of children to the father in
divorce, the practice of coverture, which meant
that when a man and woman were married, The notion
was the couple was one, and that one was the
husband. The woman could not sign contracts. She
could not own property. She had no separate
identity. And, of course, the denial of the vote.
Getting the laws of the different states amended
so that women could vote and getting a national
constitutional amendment was the goal of the
first feminist movement and that of course
culminated in 1920 with the passage of the 19th
amendment. And after that, the movement kind of
fizzled out because that had been the goal. All the
energies had gone toward that goal. The earliest
generation of feminists, Anthony and Stanton,
were dead by now. And there just was really not that
much energy. Now, yeah, go ahead. You talked about
the movement in the late 60s and how it was part of
the student movement, the anti-war movement.
What peoples did that movement share with the
other movements? Was there a completely
different group? Was there some overlaying? No,
there was a considerable amount of overlap. Jo
Freeman, who's published quite a bit, who's the
name she published under in the late 60s, was
Joreen. We were graduate students together at the
University of Chicago, and she was... a veteran of
that movement. People like Casey Hayden, Tom
Hayden's first wife. But there were others who,
well, like me, I was never prominent in the civil
rights movement. I marched and I carried banners
and I licked stamps and I put posters up all over
town. Carnation can milk, by the way, is very good
if you want to make posters stick to trees. Most
people don't know that, even though it's messy.
And I was really, because I really concentrated on
school when I was in college, and I was much too shy
to take a prominent role, and I'm not one of the
world's best-known feminists either, but I'm a
little more prominent in that movement. And one of
the things that happened that got the feminist
movement going was the publication in 1963 of The
Feminine Mystique by Betty Friedan. And Betty
Friedan was a woman who had gone to graduate school
in the 1940s, dropped out to be a housewife,
married, had three kids, and then really became a
journalist and looked around for projects. And
the 1960s, well, that was still the time when Leave
It, I don't know if you've ever seen Leave It to
Beaver, you know, all those comedies, Father
Knows Best. That was the model, the very
patriarchal family. and you were not that
everybody lived that way but you were expected to
and all of a sudden for dan was saying hey being a
housewife is not right for every woman it's a it's a
good idea to be a lawyer to have careers to go to
graduate school we have really narrowed the
possibilities for women. And of course, she was
widely thought of as being absolutely crazy. And
abuse was just heaped on her. And when I read this
book, I was a freshman in college. And in fact, it
was the book I took along on our geology field trip.
geology was a science requirement, which I took
very reluctantly. And I'm sitting there reading
this in the hotel room, nodding and thinking, oh
God, where has this been? I'm not alone. I'm not
crazy. And a lot of us felt that way. I think that you
can never really date the beginning of a movement
with any precision. I think if you dated this one,
it would be in the spring of 1968 at Columbia
University. You may have heard of the student
uprising and the trying to prevent and
successfully preventing the building of a gym in
Harlem. which the people who lived there couldn't
use, and many of whom were losing their homes
because of it. And at that time, during the sit-in,
there was a notice that was put up to all women, you
are in a liberated area, you don't have to do the
cleaning and cooking anymore. And then in the fall
of 68, I began graduate school. The Women's Caucus
in our department, Political Science, and in many
others, was organized in the next few months. And
all of a sudden, between 68 and 69, there was a
women's movement everywhere. And it wasn't
really well-perceived in the mass media or
anything like that. the things that happened. The
ERA was brought up in the Congress in 1970. It
failed then. Then it was brought up in 72. And for a
while, it looked as though it was going to pass.
Title IX of the Civil Rights Act of 1972 gave women
equal educational opportunities. And it's just
been amazing. There are now 40% of the law students
in this country are women. In medicine, the
figures are the same. They approach 50%. The same
is true in academia and graduate programs. The
changes have just been
overwhelming since that time. Has the feminist
movement gone to other nations? Absolutely.
There is a feminist movement just about
everywhere in the world, even in places you
wouldn't expect, like Spain and India. One of the
exceptions Our near exceptions is Scandinavia,
and I remember reading one article and saying,
hey, how come in Scandinavia, where the women are
probably most advanced, there's no feminist
movement, as if to suggest that a feminist
movement is really superfluous. Well, my feeling
is that there's very comparatively little
feminism in Scandinavia because they don't need
it. as yet. There is equal opportunity. In fact, I
was at a conference in Sweden this summer, and a
Swedish sociologist spoke, and she said, well,
the joke is that the state is a woman's best friend.
With the state, you don't need a man, because you
can have your career, have your children, A lot of
people in Scandinavia are unwed mothers. And I
don't mean 16-year-olds living in poverty. That
doesn't happen. I mean 35-year-old women college
professors. And because you get all these
benefits and you do have equal opportunity, there
is probably... You have the same kind of problem in
Sweden that you have here. Men do not share
housework equally or childcare. But things are
very, very different. The goals tend to be
different because there are many countries in
which Things are less advanced. I mean, in India,
one of the goals is the abolition of sati, the
custom that when a man dies, his widow jumps on his
funeral pyre. This is illegal in India, but it
still goes on. And for many women, the choice is
between sati and destitution as a widow. Widows
are very, very poor. in India. And another thing
that often happens is selective abortion,
because a fetus is female, which for a woman in Asia
may be a viable choice, because if she has a girl,
her husband and her in-laws are going to blame her
and make her life miserable. But it would be nice to
have that change. But yes, there's feminism
everywhere. Let's talk about the feminist
movement in the 70s. What happened then? or its
goals for that decade? Well, equal educational
opportunities, which we're very close to,
affordable child care, which we're not, the ERA,
which of course was defeated, significant
changes in the laws having to do with rape and
sexual abuse. That has come about. There was very
much a counter-trend, and this was not the fault of
feminists, although people often blame them,
such a thing as no-fault divorce, which was a
reform primarily sponsored by... male
legislators and lawyers, which was a very good
idea, to remove the notion that one person got a
divorce from another who was mistreating him or
her and had to pay lots of alimony, that divorce was
seen as something that happened when a marriage
ended. But the problem was that this has meant
increasingly that divorced women, if they have
children and they have backtracked their career
ambitions to take care of their kids in their home,
often end up in poverty. But it's been a way for men
to get out of obligations to their families, and
that's certainly something that has to change.
What did you do in the 70s? I got a PhD. I began my
publication career. with a book and an article,
the book, The Chains of Protection, the article on
sexual equality in the Burger Court in 1978. I
joined now. I... myself concentrating on being a
scholar, and I did. Scholarship took a front seat,
and feminist activism took a back seat, although I
did go to the march supporting the extension of the
deadline for the ERA in 1978. Let's talk about your
book, The Chains of Protection. Can you give me a
synopsis of that? Yeah. That was my dissertation,
and there's one more chapter that I wrote for
Greenwood Press. Basically, I was looking at the
court decisions pertaining to special labor
legislation for women, what is called protective
labor legislation. And this was an old idea to...
to pass laws saying that you couldn't make women
work more than a certain number of hours a day or
make them work at night or lift a lot of weights and
so on. And in many ways I wish I were writing that
book now because There was an old controversy in
the early feminist movement which is arising
again now. And essentially what happened in the
1800s when it became more and more common for women
to work outside the home, you had the same kind of
sex-segregated labour market. as we do now. There
were men's jobs and women's jobs, and the women's
jobs paid less, and they had to work longer hours,
and there was less effort given to forming unions.
So women couldn't gain concessions through
collective bargaining, as men did. And when
legislators began approaching this problem,
they saw it not as a problem of women have to work
harder, but a problem of women can't work as hard,
they're weaker, they bear children, they have
special needs, and so on. And that was essentially
the basis on which protective labor legislation
was upheld. Now there was a whole group of
feminists, people who supported women's
suffrage, people like Jane Addams of Hull House,
probably the most famous, but also Josephine
Goldmark, who wrote some of the early court
briefs, Florence Kelly, and so on, who supported
this legislation because they essentially
accepted the family with the traditional female
role as a given. Women needed concessions because
their mission in life was to be wives and mothers.
Feminists like Anthony and Stanton disagreed and
felt, well, the role in the family might be
oppressive. We need full equality. It means
moving into the professions, having the choice
not to bear children, and so on. And while the
advocates of protective labor legislation
supported women's suffrage, the advocates of
women's suffrage did not always support
protective labor legislation. After the 19th
Amendment was ratified, then you had a real split.
The social feminists who became active in the
labor movement still supporting the special
laws. The National Women's Party, under the
leadership of people like Alice Pohl,
disagreeing with them, and there were lots of
charges made. Proponents of protective labor
legislation said that the others were
anti-family, and people like Alice Paul said that
the social feminists, as they were called, were
really hurting women by endorsing their
traditional role. You can guess, which I'll bet
without any problem, what side the mainstream
media, the political parties were on. They were on
the side of the social feminists. We've got the
same split now. Maybe you remember the
controversy last spring over the mommy track. The
proposal by a woman who really should know better,
who is an expert in women's working patterns. That
in the professions, you have two tracks. If the
woman wants to work full time, which means 80 hours
a week in business and law, she can concentrate on
that. If the woman wants to work part time, which
means 40 hours, which most of us think of as full
time, and raise children, then she could be on the
quote unquote mommy track. And she will really
abandon all hope of really reaching the top
echelons. And a lot of people think that's a very
good idea. I think one woman who would is Sylvia Ann
Hewlett. Three years ago, she wrote a book which
became very controversial called A Lesser Life,
and she attacked the feminist movement
represented by people like Ferdinand, now Gloria
Steinem, and so on, for not understanding that the
central fact of most women's lives was their home
and their children. Well of course, even if that
were true for everyone, that's only true for about
20 years. And she felt that what women needed was
maternity leaves, child care, concessions so
they could be in the home, and possibly even a
salary for housework. That's an extremely
controversial proposal, which she did not make.
And she would probably support the mommy track.
But there are also a group of feminists, and I put
myself firmly in this category, group who
suggests that we need to take a look at the family
itself, because as presently constituted, it is
oppressive of women. There are a sociologist
named Arlie Hochschild has just published a book
called The Second Shift, and she looks at working
women. but blue-collar women and professionals
and sees, you know, now we've got the two-career
marriage, great. The man has one full-time job,
then he comes home and relaxes. The woman has one
full-time job at work, she comes home and has
another full-time job of taking care of the kids in
the house, and things are not shared. And the mommy
track proposal is just really buying into that.
Now, some women, I think you would be one of them,
say, well, women want it that way. They want to be
the primary caregivers. I don't think so. I doubt
that any woman wants to come home and start taking
care of her kids while her husband sits in front of
the TV and drinks a beer. I just do not believe that.
Now, it's certainly true that women bear the
children. Okay, for nine months they've got
exclusive responsibility. After that, when
they're breastfeeding, they've got a
responsibility that the man can't share. But when
you've got somebody whose two kids are seven and
five, I mean, nobody's nursing their
five-year-olds. And you've got a pattern where
she comes home and starts working, he comes home
and collapses. Come on. Nobody's going to tell me
that that's just. Right. That sounds analogous to
the... biological need for a woman to nurture,
that big argument. The biological fuck. I love it.
Oh, I love it. It was something that was...
invented, I mean, the term was invented by some
physician, I think, male. You know, that when you
get into your late 30s and early 40s, you hear your
biological clock ticking, and you get frantic if
you haven't had a baby yet, and I am here to tell you
that that does not apply to everyone. Of course,
you know, to some extent, we all have needs we are
told that we have. But it's funny, I was reading a
novel recently, a piece of trash, and it has to do
with a woman who was in medical school in the late
1950s, and she's talking about, I hear my
biological clock ticking, well, the term didn't
exist in the 50s. I mean, the writer who is writing
in 1988 is applying it to this woman. It's as if you
wrote a novel... about the Civil War, and you had
people saying like and you know and groovy and
other slang from the 1960s. It's just
anachronistic. It's very stupid. But, you know, I
think now, looking back on the book, Of course,
with hindsight, knowing that the issue I was
talking about is now so very, very important, I
would have polarized the book more. I know that I
was criticized. A couple of the reviewers said,
well, she's too strident. She's too feminist.
She's too prejudiced. And now I think I would not be
more moderate. I would really be stronger, be more
feminist, be more polarized in writing that book.
Since this is 1989, we can look back on this past
decade and try to get some perspective on it. What
happened in the 80s for the movement? Oh, boy. The
feminist movement ran into a big problem, and that
was known as the Reagan administration. And the
ERA was defeated, which a lot of people attributed
to extremism, stridency, and all of those things.
And I think that we made a big mistake, but I think
the big mistake that we made was not understanding
that state legislatures are different from
Congress. Congress is not a microcosm of... No,
I'm going to put it another way. The 50 state
legislatures are not a microcosm of Congress.
Different people get elected there. The patterns
are very different. And I think that in many ways,
the movement in the 80s was not... Well, often it's
been said that the feminist movement is dead
because it was all these horrible man-haters. And
essentially, I think that we were not
appropriately willing to condemn certain
patterns of male behavior. One of the things that
you saw in the 1980s was the divorce revolution.
More and more, he and she get married, he has a
career, she either stays home or held back on her
career to raise the kids. Fifteen years later,
they get a divorce. There's one study in
California that showed that after a divorce, a
man's income rises, the woman keeps the kids, the
family income rises. And one sociologist
described divorced women with children as the new
poor. The 80s was also the decade that saw the
feminization of poverty. More and more the people
who were poor were women raising children. Okay,
one of the things that I should have mentioned and
that I didn't was that one of the goals of the
feminist movement and of the great majority of the
people who label themselves feminists is
reproductive freedom, and that includes the
right to an abortion. And of course there has been,
if you look from Rovers' way to web services in the
reproductive health services this summer, there
was a significant back step in that. Now the news
from the latest elections are very good. There
seems to be a pendulum swinging in favor of Joyce.
Let's talk a little bit about the court. I don't
mean to limit you and say that's your specialty,
the Constitution of the Supreme Court, but I know
you're an expert on that subject. Did you talk
about that in the 80s, what the court did? Yes.
Okay. Ronald Reagan ran for president twice.
promising that he would put justices on the court,
who would overturn Roe versus Wade, who would
backtrack on affirmative action, who would do a
few other things like restore credit schools,
which don't have to do with women, but are also
similarly conservative. Very few people
believed him. The vast majorities who voted for
him in 80 and 84 didn't take him seriously. He meant
it. They were wrong not to do so. The real irony is
that Reagan's economic policies, which were
popular for a lot of voters, aren't going to come to
fruition, and his jurisprudence may. I mean,
these guys, Kennedy, Rehnquist now as chief,
Scalia, want to overturn Roe v. Wade. They are
slashing affirmative action. The only wild card
was O'Connor, and she came up in the first term when
the... real stringency with interviewing
potential Supreme Court nominees had not been
instituted by Edwin Leese and his Justice
Department. By the way, it's not only the Supreme
Court, it's the whole federal judiciary. Almost
half of the people who are now federal judges have
been appointed by Reagan. And I think Now, he
clearly has got the majority that is going to kill
affirmative action and has, essentially. He is
one vote short of the majority on Roe. Now this may
all become moot. The Illinois case, which is
scheduled for this term, the one that puts heavy
restrictions on clinics, may not be heard at all.
Because the attorney general who brought the case
is running for governor and he cannot get money
because of his anti-choice stance. And now he's
trying to get a compromise in the case and get it
withdrawn from the court. So it's going to be
interesting to see what Bush is going to do. Bush is
in real trouble on this whole issue. And Bush
promised that he was going to appoint judges who
would overturn Roe and do all these things. It's
going to be interesting to notice, if you will.
You were talking about Reagan and how he has so many
people put on the bench. What could that do to the
movement? I think it has already done a great deal
and what it has told us is that don't go to the
Supreme Court. The situation is not analogous to
the blacks in the 1950s to Brown v. Board of
Education. And more and more cases have been filed
in state courts, which are sometimes receptive.
People have gone to the legislatures and to
Congress. One of the things that I think could
happen, I think that pro-choice has the potential
of bringing about a significant realignment in
American politics. I think this is very good news
for the Democrats. Now, I don't think the
Democrats have the guts to run on the pro-choice
issue and make it theirs. And I don't think the
Republicans have the stupidity to let them. And
right now, as I said, if you saw that article in the
Eagle over the weekend, I think the
identification is with the Democrats. I don't
think it's going to stay that way. So there will not
be a realignment. But I think basically that's a
failure of nerve on the part of the Democratic
Party. I've voted Democrat all my life, and I
probably always will, but I'm really pretty sick
of their cowardice at the national level at the
moment. Let's talk about your other book, 1983,
Equality Under the Constitution. This was the
book where I tried to go from feminism to a general
theory of equality. I'll tell you what I do not
mean. There was a cliche that was very common in the
late 60s and early 70s. You heard this from
Menelak. Let's not talk about women's
liberation. Let's not talk about human
liberation. And what that meant basically is
let's not talk about the way I oppress you. Let's
talk about the way other society oppresses me. And
that isn't what I meant. But I wanted to ask, if you
are a feminist, if you are committed to sexual
equality, what does that mean in terms of thinking
about society and equality in general? Well, one
of the things that it seemed to me to mean was that if
you really believe that women and men are equal,
you're saying that... physical differences
really shouldn't be used as a basis for
inequality. And you're also saying that sex roles
and, of course, sex itself, sexual activity,
should not be used as such a basis. Isn't that
really affected the way... There are two chapters
in the more recent book, one on disability, one on
homosexuality. And those are things that I had to
think about a lot as a feminist because it does seem
to me that you... A true commitment to sexual
inequality implies looking at sex roles, at
sexual orientation, and at physical differences
in a new way. And you know, I went back, there's a
chapter in there on the history of the 14th
Amendment where I try to look at the whole thing in a
new way. Historical treatments of the 14th
Amendment were very big at the time that I was
writing. And in fact, there's a new book out, which
I just read a long review of, for a journal, where
somebody looks at a lot of us who are writing from,
say, the years from 77 and 85, and I'm one of the
people he mentions. I'm at one extreme, and there
are a few others at the conservative extreme. And
it was quite interesting. I had gotten what I
expected, some extremely negative reviews from
the conservative wing of the political science
profession. I've also got some very positive
feedback, although I used to joke for a while that
everyone who liked the book wrote me a letter.
Everyone who didn't like the book wrote a review
and got it published. Okay, you wrote in 1985 on
feminism and ethics. Yes. I was asked to write an
introductory article for an issue of a journal
called Women in Politics, and that journal itself
owes its existence to the feminist movement. It
began publication in 1980. And I was basically
saying, here are the articles we're publishing on
this issue, write what you please. And one of those
articles by a historian named Robert Booth Fowler
had to do with feminism in a place you wouldn't
necessarily expect to find feminism, and that is
the evangelical Christian movement. And of
course, this is all kinds of ethical issues. that
arise here. And then another article written by a
very good friend of mine, Leslie Goldstein, who
teaches political science at the University of
Delaware, had to do with the issue of Medicaid
funding for abortions and where we should stop and
all of this. She looked at the All of the biological
data on the fetus, you know, when can we say it
becomes human and all of that, and found that, you
know, for one thing, life doesn't begin. Life is
passed on from the sperm in the ovum. And that it's
really not true that at the moment that these
unite, you have a human being. At the moment that
these unite, you have some tissue which has about a
50% chance of being miscarried. or you wouldn't
even call it that, as almost being a kind of tumor
which exists in the uterus for a week or two and then
leaves. The whole process of fertilization,
implantation, and becoming a pregnancy is a very,
very complex process. And she talked about the
ethics of late abortion and all of that. And I
decided to write on feminism and ethics and what
the question is also something that interests me
having been brought up as an episcopalian having
gone to church to sunday school i'm now unitarian
and having been interested in religious
questions and ethical questions all my life how
does a feminist live a moral life given a
commitment to sexual equality what does this mean
And one of the things that has always struck me and
has struck most people is that
women, in a sense, bear moral responsibility. If
you go to the supermarket, you see all these
magazines directed at women and giving guidance
how to run your family, your house. There is no such
thing as men's family circle. There are no
magazines on fathering. There's lots of
magazines for mothers. If you look at Parents
Magazine, look at its advertising, it's very
clear who they expect to buy and read against
mothers. And you go to, you know, you look at
self-help books in the library. They're usually
addressed to women. Who goes to church or to temple
or listens to sermons? Women. And that it's, women
are the targets of moral exhortations. Men are
not. And in a way, there is certainly an imbalance.
Women are the ones who are made to feel guilty about
their parents, about their children, about
everything else. Men are not. But on the other
hand, do we want... to say that it's okay for women
to act like men. And I argue that no, I mean, you
don't want, just because men walk out on their
families, it doesn't mean that women can. Just
because men do not have the burden of doing things
for people, visiting the sick, helping the poor,
taking care of your ill mother, your children,
your neighbors, that's necessary. Just because
men don't do that does not really mean that I think
that women should give it up too. There, I think,
has to be a balance between excessive
responsibility and some sort of moral
responsibility. And I talk a lot about
evangelical Christianity in that article
because of course that's very central. What are
your duties as a human being in Christianity? And
how, you know, I point out that the women who are
feminists within evangelical Christianity
reject all the patriarchal notions, but on the
other hand, they wouldn't be comfortable with the
message that you get from what we used to call the
human potential movement in the 60s. Maybe you've
seen the poster that says, I do my thing, you do your
thing. Okay, you wouldn't be comfortable with
that. You also wouldn't be comfortable with the
go-for-it-baby-and-grab-it school of thought
self-help books, which are often written for
women in business, that this is something which to
a serious Christian even a feminist or to anyone
with serious ethical principles is just not
acceptable. Let's get back to the religious issue
again. There's an idea of thinking of God as
mother. How do you feel about that? I like it
because the ways we think of God are culturally
determined. It makes at least as much sense to
think of God as mother as God as father. I mean,
Judeo-Christian tradition is patriarchal, so
naturally we see it as God the Father, and of course
in Christianity it's Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and that really kind of lets you out if you're a
woman. But you know, there are some religions The
Eastern religions do not really conceive of God as
a figure of such a sort at all. And of course, these
have influenced the Eastern version of
Christianity. For example, in Japanese, the
Lord's Prayer is not. our Father, it is our God who
art in heaven because in Japanese culture it
simply makes no sense to conceive of God as a Father
and women in various religions are bringing up new
patterns. And I know the Unitarian Church has a
curriculum that we're running there now, which is
called Cakes for the Queen of Heaven. And that's
from a quotation from Jeremiah, and it's a very
nasty quotation, saying, you know, the women like
the pagan religions. instead of Judaism, which of
course for him was the truth. And you go back and
look at pagan religions, you look at Wicca, for
example, which is the art of witchcraft. A witch is
not only somebody who is evil, although that was an
outgrowth of that tradition. But Wicca is, for
example, very much involved with the art of
natural healing through witchcraft. herbs and
things of that sort. It really has been distorted
by patriarchal Judeo-Christian tradition. And
some of the Roman gods and goddesses, for example,
the myth, which is in both Greek and Roman
mythology, of Demeter and Persephone, of how the
seasons got started, the mother-daughter
relation there. And a lot of, within many
religions, really all of the mainstream
religions, there is some effort going on to
reclaim this part of the tradition, which
existed, which did exist. The notion of God,
conceiving of God as a mother, is not something the
20th century feminists made up. It was in the
history of our traditions and really buried. And
that is being claimed, and a lot of research is
going on about that. Let's move on to your next
writing, 1987, Sexuality and the Law. Yeah, that
is an article that I did for the American
Encyclopedia of the Judicial System, and I was
invited to do that, and that pulled through in a lot
of things about all rape that I wrote about
homosexuality and the ways that it has been
conceived in law and so on. There was a theme of that
article, and basically I was saying that
Traditionally, the law has punished people who
deviate from the patriarchal norm. It has
punished homosexuals and sometimes even
unmarried women. And it's punished them more
consistently than people who violently act out.
the patriarchal norm. That's essentially what
rape and incest are. They are a violent acting out
of the norm that men, that fathers have power, that
men have sexual power over women and can demand
sexual services, and so on. And even though the
text of our laws has very heavy penalties for rape,
they have in the past included death, that's not
what happens. Only, I think, about one in ten
rapists are punished. And that was the second.
That is really not scholarship. That is an article
for a general audience. That's an article for
somebody who wants to write a paper, to go read the
article and look at the bibliography and get some
ideas. And that really is, I think, who those
encyclopedias will be used by. They'll be used by
students who want a starting point. Okay, we're
going to flip the tape. Okay.